<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>An apartment in the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke’s</b> palace.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Vincentio</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Escalus</b>, Lords and Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Vincentio</td>
							<td>Escalus.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Escalus</td>
							<td>My lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Vincentio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Of government the properties to unfold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would seem in me to affect speech and discourse;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since I am put to know that your own science</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My strength can give you: then no more remains,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that to your sufficiency as your Worth is able,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let them work. The nature of our people,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our city’s institutions, and the terms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For common justice, you’re as pregnant in</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As art and practise hath enriched any</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we remember. There is our commission,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From which we would not have you warp. Call hither,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I say, bid come before us Angelo. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit an Attendant.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>What figure of us think you he will bear?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For you must know, we have with special soul</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Elected him our absence to supply,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lent him our terror, dress’d him with our love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And given his deputation all the organs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of our own power: what think you of it?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Escalus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If any in Vienna be of worth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To undergo such ample grace and honour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is Lord Angelo.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Vincentio</td>
							<td>Look where he comes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angelo</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angelo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Always obedient to your grace’s will,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I come to know your pleasure.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Vincentio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Angelo,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is a kind of character in thy life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That to the observer doth thy history</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fully unfold. Thyself and thy belongings</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are not thine own so proper as to waste</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Heaven doth with us as we with torches do,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did not go forth of us, ’twere all alike</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely touch’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But to fine issues, nor Nature never lends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The smallest scruple of her excellence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Herself the glory of a creditor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both thanks and use. But I do bend my speech</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To one that can my part in him advertise;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hold therefore, Angelo:⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In our remove be thou at full ourself;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mortality and mercy in Vienna</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Live in thy tongue and heart: old Escalus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though first in question, is thy secondary.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take thy commission.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angelo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, good my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let there be some more test made of my metal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before so noble and so great a figure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be stamp’d upon it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Vincentio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No more evasion:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We have with a leaven’d and prepared choice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Proceeded to you; therefore take your honours.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our haste from hence is of so quick condition</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That it prefers itself and leaves unquestion’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Matters of needful value. We shall write to you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As time and our concernings shall importune,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How it goes with us, and do look to know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What doth befall you here. So, fare you well;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the hopeful execution do I leave you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of your commissions.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angelo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yet give leave, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we may bring you something on the way.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Vincentio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My haste may not admit it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor need you, on mine honour, have to do</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With any scruple; your scope is as mine own</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So to enforce or qualify the laws</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As to your soul seems good. Give me your hand:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll privily away. I love the people,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But do not like to stage me to their eyes:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through it do well, I do not relish well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their loud applause and Aves vehement;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor do I think the man of safe discretion</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That does affect it. Once more, fare you well.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angelo</td>
							<td>The heavens give safety to your purposes!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Escalus</td>
							<td>Lead forth and bring you back in happiness!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td>I thank you. Fare you well. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Escalus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I shall desire you, sir, to give me leave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To have free speech with you; and it concerns me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To look into the bottom of my place:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A power I have, but of what strength and nature</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am not yet instructed.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angelo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis so with me. Let us withdraw together,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we may soon our satisfaction have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Touching that point.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Escalus</td>
							<td>I’ll wait upon your honour. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A Street.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</b> and two <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gentlemen</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>If the duke with the other dukes come not to composition with the King of Hungary, why then all the dukes fall upon the king.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td>Heaven grant us its peace, but not the King of Hungary’s!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td>Amen.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>Thou concludest like the sanctimonious pirate, that went to sea with the Ten Commandments, but scraped one out of the table.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td>“Thou shalt not steal”?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>Ay, that he razed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td>Why, ’twas a commandment to command the captain and all the rest from their functions: they put forth to steal. There’s not a soldier of us all, that, in the thanksgiving before meat, do relish the petition well that prays for peace.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td>I never heard any soldier dislike it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>I believe thee; for I think thou never wast where grace was said.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td>No? a dozen times at least.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td>What, in metre?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>In any proportion or in any language.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td>I think, or in any religion.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>Ay, why not? Grace is grace, despite of all controversy: as, for example, thou thyself art a wicked villain, despite of all grace.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td>Well, there went but a pair of shears between us.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>I grant; as there may between the lists and the velvet. Thou art the list.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td>And thou the velvet: thou art good velvet; thou’rt a three-piled piece, I warrant thee: I had as lief be a list of an English kersey as be piled, as thou art piled, for a French velvet. Do I speak feelingly now?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>I think thou dost; and, indeed, with most painful feeling of thy speech: I will, out of thine own confession, learn to begin thy health; but, whilst I live, forget to drink after thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td>I think I have done myself wrong, have I not?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td>Yes, that thou hast, whether thou art tainted or free.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>Behold, behold. where Madam Mitigation comes! I have purchased as many diseases under her roof as come to⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td>To what, I pray?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>Judge.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td>To three thousand dolours a year.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td>Ay, and more.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>A French crown more.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td>Thou art always figuring diseases in me; but thou art full of error; I am sound.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>Nay, not as one would say, healthy; but so sound as things that are hollow: thy bones are hollow; impiety has made a feast of thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mistress Overdone</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td>How now! which of your hips has the most profound sciatica?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mistress Overdone</td>
							<td>Well, well; there’s one yonder arrested and carried to prison was worth five thousand of you all.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td>Who’s that, I pray thee?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mistress Overdone</td>
							<td>Marry, sir, that’s Claudio, Signior Claudio.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td>Claudio to prison? ’tis not so.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mistress Overdone</td>
							<td>Nay, but I know ’tis so: I saw him arrested, saw him carried away; and, which is more, within these three days his head to be chopped off.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>But, after all this fooling, I would not have it so. Art thou sure of this?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mistress Overdone</td>
							<td>I am too sure of it: and it is for getting Madam Julietta with child.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>Believe me, this may be: he promised to meet me two hours since, and he was ever precise in promise-keeping.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td>Besides, you know, it draws something near to the speech we had to such a purpose.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td>But, most of all, agreeing with the proclamation.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>Away! let’s go learn the truth of it. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gentlemen</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mistress Overdone</td>
							<td>Thus, what with the war, what with the sweat, what with the gallows and what with poverty, I am custom-shrunk.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pompey</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>How now! what’s the news with you?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pompey</td>
							<td>Yonder man is carried to prison.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mistress Overdone</td>
							<td>Well; what has he done?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pompey</td>
							<td>A woman.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mistress Overdone</td>
							<td>But what’s his offence?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pompey</td>
							<td>Groping for trouts in a peculiar river.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mistress Overdone</td>
							<td>What, is there a maid with child by him?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pompey</td>
							<td>No, but there’s a woman with maid by him. You have not heard of the proclamation, have you?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mistress Overdone</td>
							<td>What proclamation, man?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pompey</td>
							<td>All houses in the suburbs of Vienna must be plucked down.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mistress Overdone</td>
							<td>And what shall become of those in the city?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pompey</td>
							<td>They shall stand for seed: they had gone down too, but that a wise burgher put in for them.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mistress Overdone</td>
							<td>But shall all our houses of resort in the suburbs be pulled down?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pompey</td>
							<td>To the ground, mistress.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mistress Overdone</td>
							<td>Why, here’s a change indeed in the commonwealth! What shall become of me?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pompey</td>
							<td>Come; fear you not: good counsellors lack no clients: though you change your place, you need not change your trade; I’ll be your tapster still. Courage! there will be pity taken on you: you that have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you will be considered.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mistress Overdone</td>
							<td>What’s to do here, Thomas tapster? let’s withdraw.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pompey</td>
							<td>Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the provost to prison; and there’s Madam Juliet. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Provost</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Claudio</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Juliet</b>, and Officers.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Claudio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fellow, why dost thou show me thus to the world?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bear me to prison, where I am committed.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Provost</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do it not in evil disposition,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But from Lord Angelo by special charge.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Claudio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thus can the demigod Authority</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make us pay down for our offence by weight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The words of heaven; on whom it will, it will;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On whom it will not, so; yet still ’tis just.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</b> and two <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gentlemen</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>Why, how now, Claudio! whence comes this restraint?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Claudio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>From too much liberty, my Lucio, liberty:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As surfeit is the father of much fast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So every scope by the immoderate use</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Turns to restraint. Our natures do pursue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like rats that ravin down their proper bane,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A thirsty evil; and when we drink we die.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>If could speak so wisely under an arrest, I would send for certain of my creditors: and yet, to say the truth, I had as lief have the foppery of freedom as the morality of imprisonment. What’s thy offence, Claudio?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Claudio</td>
							<td>What but to speak of would offend again.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>What, is’t murder?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Claudio</td>
							<td>No.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>Lechery?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Claudio</td>
							<td>Call it so.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Provost</td>
							<td>Away, sir! you must go.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Claudio</td>
							<td>One word, good friend. Lucio, a word with you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A hundred, if they’ll do you any good.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is lechery so look’d after?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Claudio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thus stands it with me: upon a true contract</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I got possession of Julietta’s bed:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You know the lady; she is fast my wife,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save that we do the denunciation lack</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of outward order: this we came not to,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Only for propagation of a dower</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Remaining in the coffer of her friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From whom we thought it meet to hide our love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till time had made them for us. But it chances</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The stealth of our most mutual entertainment</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With character too gross is writ on Juliet.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>With child, perhaps?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Claudio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Unhappily, even so.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the new deputy now for the duke⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or whether that the body public be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A horse whereon the governor doth ride,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, newly in the seat, that it may know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He can command, lets it straight feel the spur;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whether the tyranny be in his place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or in his emmence that fills it up,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I stagger in:⁠—but this new governor</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Awakes me all the enrolled penalties</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which have, like unscour’d armour, hung by the wall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And none of them been worn; and, for a name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now puts the drowsy and neglected act</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Freshly on me: ’tis surely for a name.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>I warrant it is: and thy head stands so tickle on thy shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love, may sigh it off. Send after the duke and appeal to him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Claudio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have done so, but he’s not to be found.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I prithee, Lucio, do me this kind service:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This day my sister should the cloister enter</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And there receive her approbation:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Acquaint her with the danger of my state:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Implore her, in my voice, that she make friends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the strict deputy; bid herself assay him:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have great hope in that; for in her youth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is a prone and speechless dialect,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such as move men; beside, she hath prosperous art</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When she will play with reason and discourse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And well she can persuade.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>I pray she may; as well for the encouragement of the like, which else would stand under grievous imposition, as for the enjoying of thy life, who I would be sorry should be thus foolishly lost at a game of tick-tack. I’ll to her.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Claudio</td>
							<td>I thank you, good friend Lucio.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>Within two hours.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Claudio</td>
							<td>Come, officer, away! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A monastery.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Vincentio</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Friar Thomas</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Vincentio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, holy father; throw away that thought;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Believe not that the dribbling dart of love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can pierce a complete bosom. Why I desire thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To give me secret harbour, hath a purpose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of burning youth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Friar Thomas</td>
							<td>May your grace speak of it?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Vincentio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My holy sir, none better knows than you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How I have ever loved the life removed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And held in idle price to haunt assemblies</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where youth, and cost, and witless bravery keeps.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have deliver’d to Lord Angelo,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A man of stricture and firm abstinence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My absolute power and place here in Vienna,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he supposes me travell’d to Poland;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For so I have strew’d it in the common ear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so it is received. Now, pious sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You will demand of me why I do this?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Friar Thomas</td>
							<td>Gladly, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Vincentio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We have strict statutes and most biting laws.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which for this nineteen years we have let slip;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even like an o’ergrown lion in a cave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That goes not out to prey. Now, as fond fathers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Having bound up the threatening twigs of birch,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Only to stick it in their children’s sight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For terror, not to use, in time the rod</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Becomes more mock’d than fear’d; so our decrees,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And liberty plucks justice by the nose;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Goes all decorum.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Friar Thomas</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It rested in your grace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To unloose this tied-up justice when you pleased:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And it in you more dreadful would have seem’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than in Lord Angelo.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Vincentio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do fear, too dreadful:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sith ’twas my fault to give the people scope,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For what I bid them do: for we bid this be done,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When evil deeds have their permissive pass</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not the punishment. Therefore indeed, my father,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have on Angelo imposed the office;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who may, in the ambush of my name, strike home,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet my nature never in the fight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To do in slander. And to behold his sway,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will, as ’twere a brother of your order,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Visit both prince and people: therefore, I prithee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Supply me with the habit and instruct me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How I may formally in person bear me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like a true friar. More reasons for this action</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At our more leisure shall I render you;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Only, this one: Lord Angelo is precise;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stands at a guard with envy; scarce confesses</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That his blood flows, or that his appetite</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is more to bread than stone: hence shall we see,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If power change purpose, what our seemers be. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A nunnery.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Francisca</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</td>
							<td>And have you nuns no farther privileges?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Francisca</td>
							<td>Are not these large enough?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes, truly; I speak not as desiring more;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But rather wishing a more strict restraint</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the sisterhood, the votarists of Saint Clare.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Within.</i> Ho! Peace be in this place!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</td>
							<td>Who’s that which calls?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Francisca</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is a man’s voice. Gentle Isabella,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Turn you the key, and know his business of him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You may, I may not; you are yet unsworn.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When you have vow’d, you must not speak with men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But in the presence of the prioress:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, if you speak, you must not show your face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, if you show your face, you must not speak.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He calls again; I pray you, answer him. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</td>
							<td>Peace and prosperity! Who is’t that calls</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Proclaim you are no less! Can you so stead me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As bring me to the sight of Isabella,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A novice of this place and the fair sister</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To her unhappy brother Claudio?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why “her unhappy brother”? let me ask,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The rather for I now must make you know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am that Isabella and his sister.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not to be weary with you, he’s in prison.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</td>
							<td>Woe me! for what?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>For that which, if myself might be his judge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He should receive his punishment in thanks:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He hath got his friend with child.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</td>
							<td>Sir, make me not your story.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is true.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would not⁠—though ’tis my familiar sin</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With maids to seem the lapwing and to jest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tongue far from heart⁠—play with all virgins so:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I hold you as a thing ensky’d and sainted.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By your renouncement an immortal spirit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to be talk’d with in sincerity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As with a saint.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</td>
							<td>You do blaspheme the good in mocking me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Do not believe it. Fewness and truth, ’tis thus:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your brother and his lover have embraced:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As those that feed grow full, as blossoming time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That from the seedness the bare fallow brings</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</td>
							<td>Some one with child by him? My cousin Juliet?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>Is she your cousin?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Adoptedly; as school-maids change their names</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By vain though apt affection.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>She it is.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</td>
							<td>O, let him marry her.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This is the point.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The duke is very strangely gone from hence;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bore many gentlemen, myself being one,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In hand and hope of action: but we do learn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By those that know the very nerves of state,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His givings-out were of an infinite distance</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From his true-meant design. Upon his place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with full line of his authority,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Governs Lord Angelo; a man whose blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is very snow-broth; one who never feels</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wanton stings and motions of the sense,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But doth rebate and blunt his natural edge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With profits of the mind, study and fast.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He⁠—to give fear to use and liberty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which have for long run by the hideous law,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As mice by lions⁠—hath pick’d out an act,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Under whose heavy sense your brother’s life</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Falls into forfeit: he arrests him on it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And follows close the rigour of the statute,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make him an example. All hope is gone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To soften Angelo: and that’s my pith of business</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Twixt you and your poor brother.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</td>
							<td>Doth he so seek his life?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Has censured him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Already; and, as I hear, the provost hath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A warrant for his execution.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas! what poor ability’s in me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To do him good?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>Assay the power you have.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</td>
							<td>My power? Alas, I doubt⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Our doubts are traitors</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make us lose the good we oft might win</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By fearing to attempt. Go to Lord Angelo,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let him learn to know, when maidens sue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Men give like gods; but when they weep and kneel,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All their petitions are as freely theirs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As they themselves would owe them.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</td>
							<td>I’ll see what I can do.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>But speedily.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I will about it straight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No longer staying but to give the mother</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Notice of my affair. I humbly thank you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commend me to my brother: soon at night</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll send him certain word of my success.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucio</td>
							<td>I take my leave of you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Isabella</td>
							<td>Good sir, adieu. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
